CEDAR-Center for Expanded Data Annotation and Retrieval
VODAN-Virus Outbreak Data Network 
HMIS-Health management information system 
DISH-Digital Innovation and Skills Hub 



——————————————————————————————
In this section, several issues are described that are relevant
to the problem of health data management in Africa. These are:
(a) lack of ownership of health data in Africa; (b) lack of health data
diversity, resulting in less relevant data-based solutions for Africa;
(c) obstacles to the digitalization of health care in Africa;
(d) monopolies and the commercial use of (health) data in Africa, and
(e) differentiation in regulations with incompatible requirements
across regions and continents.
————P3
The objective of data management is to “provide analytical information to help drive operational
decision-making and strategic planning.”
————P4

The research presented in this article covers 5 years (2016-2021)
and was carried out in two phases. In the first phase (2016-2018), the
principal investigator served as an advisor to the East Africa Health
Research Commission (EAHRC).

During the second phase (2019-2021), a
research group was established, led by the principal investigator, in
countries across the whole of Africa: Uganda, Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia,
Nigeria, Somalia, Tanzania, Tunisia, and Zimbabwe.
————P4

The pilot started with data relevant to COVID-19. The steps of the pilot phase were identified as: (a) testing
of the proposition without an online realization; (b) presentation of a
clear proposition to stakeholders; (c) implementation of FAIR Equivalency analyses (as per above); (d) approval by stakeholders in all locations; (e) establishment of 10 FAIR Data Points reachable over the
Internet; (f) machine-actionable data production (test data and real
data); (g) running of queries over the Internet across the FAIR Data
Points that visit the machine-actionable clinical patient data; and
(h) completion of successful proof of concept.
————P7

The successful proof of concept confirmed that implementation of the FAIR Principles for observable patient
records in health facilities was a relevant approach to increasing access
to reliable observational health data.
————P7

Two systems were identified for testing: the Data Stewardship
(DS) Wizard, which had developed the original WHO e-CRF system
and FAIR Data Points, and CEDAR. It was concluded that the best
match with the requirements and specifications was offered by
CEDAR.
————P7

In order to
put in place a trustworthy set of layers, the following have been identified
as necessary by the VODAN Africa community: (a) a data processing
agreement, based on a joint and common agreement among all data
processing partners, encompassing the strictest data control and
processing requirements and equivalent to the GDPR; (b) the FAIR Equivalency tool to analyze specific areas of attention or opt out based on the
regulatory framework in a given jurisdiction; (c) agreements about machine-readable templates that are based on commonly used templates
in the HMIS, such as DHIS (for clinical data only); (d) an agreement on
repositories and levels of data security to keep data safe within the residence (repository) where the data is stored; (e) an agreement on data
pipelines used for dashboards in the facilities providing key real-time
aggregate data at the facility level; and (e) an agreement on the data pipelines used for the VODAN dashboard to create aggregate information

————P8